# PhD
R code base for the analyses done in my PhD: 'Improving Species Distribution Models for Commercially Important Marine Species on a Global Scale'. This dissertation was submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at the Faculty of Earth Sciences & Geography of the University of Cambridge by Jan Laurens Geffert on the 20th of March 2016

## Summary
Data on marine species’ distributions are a central prerequisite for the management, conservation, and sustainable use of marine living resources. However, our knowledge of the distribution of many species is still poor. Commonly applied approaches to extrapolate available data and approximate true species’ distributions include expert range maps and species distribution models (SDM). This thesis generates global distribution maps for over a thousand marine species of commercial importance, compares and optimises these spatial predictions, and introduces a new and improved synthesis method to combine expert range map and SDM approaches.

The thesis lists data sources for species occurrence data and environmental predictor variables of global extent. For species data, two major datasets from the Ocean Biogeographic Information System (OBIS) and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) were used to compile presence-only datasets of species occurrence records. The datasets were compared, cleaned, and tested for biases. For environmental data, different datasets were compared and seven variables from the AquaMaps environmental dataset were chosen. The selected datasets were then used as input for three SDM algorithms, Bioclim, Maxent, and Boosted Regression Trees, to model the distribution of commercially important marine species. A set of predictions using the standard settings was used as a baseline to evaluate the change in predictive performance of model modifications.

The thesis addresses the problem of sampling bias in the species occurrence data by using the “target group background approach”. Conventional methods for the evaluation of model predictions with subsets of species occurrence data were found to be problematic. Test data was not truly independent, and evaluating a bias-corrected model with biased test data resulted in lower than standard estimated predictive performance. Therefore, the models were also evaluated using expert range maps from the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). This approach resulted in an increase in predictive performance, particularly for pelagic species. 
The expert range maps were then used to improve model performance by including them as a layer in the model fitting process. These expert range maps allow for the differentiation between potentially suitable habitat and accessible suitable habitat, and their information on the spatial structure of the range can act as a proxy for population dynamics and dispersal. Expert range maps were included in the model-fitting stage and used in conjunction with species occurrence records and environmental variables to improve the predictions of species distributions. This approach adds the missing geographic dimension to SDMs fitted only in environmental space.

The modifications, introduced and tested as described above, were then combined in one run to produce improved predictions of species’ distributions. Models were run ten times each with varying data subsets to produce a measure of variability in the model results, indicative of prediction uncertainty. The final maps offer higher predictive performance, address concerns about sampling bias and dispersal, and are of greater ecological realism than maps generated using the standard approach. They therefore offer the potential to inform more effective and efficient conservation prioritisation and spatial planning decisions.
